~Aadhi Thaalam

  CHATHUSRA JAATHI  THRIPUTA THAALAM, with a  LAGHU
  of 4  units and 2 DHRUTHAMS of 2 units each - in all 8 units or
  AKSHARAMS.  A most popular thaalam - the only thaalam for
  which the individual name 'Aadhi' is used.
~Aalaapana 
 
  Elaboration of the RAAGAM mood by improvisation and without 
  THAALAM (rhythm). The syllables ta,ra,na,nom are used in the 
  South for Alaapana but the vowel 'aa' predominates.  It is 
  customary to sing Alaapana before a major KRITHI. Singing 
  Alaapana is also referred to as singing raagam.
~Aarohanam

  Ascending sequence of notes. Also used for defining the notes
  used and how they follow each other in the ascent of a RAAGAM.
~Aavartham

  One complete cycle of a THAALAM.  Thani Aavartham or Thani  
  Aavarthanam  refers to playing of percussion instruments
  independently (not as accompaniment to melody).
~Aksharam

  A single time unit forming the basis for THAALAM (Rhythm).  No 
  absolute tempo or speed is prescribed in Carnatic Music. The 
  duration of different parts of a thaalam and the total duration
  of one cycle are all measured in Akshaarams.
~Alankaaram

  Beginner's exercises using sa,ri,ga,ma... (solfa)  in different 
  THAALAMs.
~Amsa

  The dominant note of a RAAGAM. 
~Angam

  The different parts of a THAALAM such as LAGHU, DHRUTHAM
  and ANUDHRUTHAM.
~Anthara Gaandhaaram

  The fifth note in the 12 notes system (ga2 in this package).
  E - The third white note on the keyboard.  The note coalesces
  well with the drone as its frequency (5/4 in the natural scale)
  is one-fourth the fifth harmonic of the Tonic.
~Anudhrutham

  The part of a THAALAM represented by a single beat or clap and 
  consisting of a single AKSHARAM.  In the 7 Thaalam classifica-
  tion anudhrutham is used only in JAMPA  thaalam.
~Anupallavi

  The second part or movement of a KRITHI which consists of
  PALLAVI, anupallavi and CHARANAM. After the anupallavi the
  pallavi is sung before singing charanam.  In many compositions 
  the anupallavi  is set in the higher pitch ranges and helps in 
  building the RAAGAM mood. There are Krithis (especially by
  Deekshithar) without anupallavi.
~Anyaswaram

  Note occurring in JANYA RAAGAM not found in JANAKA scale.
  Raagams having anyaswaram are BHAASHAANGA Raagams.
  The anyaswaram may occur only in selected phrases or only
  in ascent or descent. For instsance Saaranga, janyam of Mecha-
  Kalyaani uses both madhyamams. Suddha madhyamam not
  present in the parent scale is used in the phrase ri-ga-ma*-ri-sa.
  Anyaswarams are marked with asterisk ' * ' in notation.
~Arai

  Half (Tamil). Used to indicate starting point of a composition  
  which starts after half an AKSHARAM from the beginning of
  the rhythm cycle ( Arai Idam).
~Ata Thaalam

  One of the 7 THAALAMs. Consists of two LAGHUs and two
  DHRUTHAMs. The common Ata thaalam is KHANDA JAATHI 
  Ata thaalam and has 14 AKSHARAMs (5+5+2+2).
~Atheetha Eduppu

  Where the composition starts before the first beat of  the 
  THAALAM cycle. An example is Sivakaama Sundhari in Mukhari
  illustrated in the thaalam module.
~Avarohanam

  Descending sequence of notes; also defining notes and their
  sequence in the descent of a RAAGAM.
~Bhaashaanga Raagam

  A JANYA  raagam which uses one or more notes not present in 
  the parent scale (JANAKA MELAM). As the parent scale has all 
  the 7 notes, this implies that the two varieties of a particular
  note are used in the Bhaashaanga Raagam. More than one note may
  be chosen for this treatment and the additional note is called
  ANYASWARAM.
~Bhaavam

  Feeling or sentiment.  The term Raaga Bhaavam is used to refer 
  to RAAGAM mood.
~Charanam

  The third part or movement of the KRITHI type of composition,  
  sung after the PALLAVI and ANUPALLAVI.   In many KRITHIS
  after the anupallavi dwells on the higher pitch ranges, the 
  charanam starts in the middle range giving a sense of repose.
  Many  krithis have more than one  charanam with the same tune 
  but there are krithis with charanams with different tunes.  In one  
  form of krithi the last part of the charanam is sung in the same 
  tune as the ANUPALLAVI  (popular in Thyaagaraaja  krithis). Some 
  krithis of Dheekshithar have only "Samashti Charanam" without 
  an Anupallavi.
~Chathurasra

  (or) Chathusra - 4 units. Used to define JAATHI (Chathusra 
  Jaathi THAALAMs have LAGHU with 4 AKSHARAMs).  Also
  used to define the gathi or NADAI.  (Chathurasra gathi implies
  4 notes per aksharam).
~Chathusra

  (or) Chathurasra-4 units. Used to define JAATHI (Chathusra
  Jaathi THAALAMs have LAGHU with 4 AKSHARAMs).  Also
  used to define the gathi or  NADAI.  (Chathusra  gathi implies
  4 notes per aksharam).
~Chathusruthi Dhaivatham

  The tenth note in the 12 notes system (da2 in this package). The 
  (sixth) white note A.
~Chathusruthi Rishabham

  The third note in the 12 notes system (ri2 in this package).  The 
  (second) white note D.
~Chitta Swaram

  One or more AAVARTHAMs of solfa (sa ri ga ma....) notes
  composed by the author of the KRITHI or added later, and sung 
  after ANUPALLAVI and CHARANAM before singing pallavi. Chitta
  means not extempore(as opposed to KALPANA).
~Da

  The sixth of the 7 notes. The letter Da is used both for notation 
  and for solfa singing. The note is referred to as  DHAIVATHAM.  
  Pronounced like `th' in `then'.
~Dhaivatham

  The note Da.  It can take 3 positions-SUDDHA DHAIVATHAM
  (A flat), CHATHUSRUTHI DHAIVATHAM (A) and SHADSRUTHI 
  DHAIVATHAM (A sharp), referred to in this package as da1, da2
  and da3 respectively  Shadsruthi Dhaivatham (da3) is in the position 
  of  KAISIKI NISHAADHAM (ni1) and RAAGAMS using it are 
  VIVAADHI.
~Dhrutham

  The ANGAM or part of a THAALAM indicated by a beat or clap
  followed by a wave or turning the palm upwards.  It always 
  consists of two AKSHARAMs.
~Dhruva Thaalam

  One of the 35 THAALAMS.  Consists of a LAGHU, followed by a 
  DHRUTHAM and two LAGHUs. The common Dhruva thaalam is in 
  CHATHUSRA JAATHI with 14 AKSHARAMs(4+2+4+4).
~Eduppu

  (Lit. Taking).  Used to refer to the point in the THAALAM
  structure where the composition starts  - e.g arai eduppu
  means the composition starts half a unit after the beginning
  of the AAVARTHAM.
~Eka Thaalam

  One of the 35 THAALAMs - consists of a single LAGHU. The
  common Eka thaalam is of CHATHUSRA JAATHI and has 4
  AKSHARAMs in the single Laghu.
~Ga

  The third of the 7 notes.  The letter Ga is used both in
  notation and in solfa singing.   The note is referred to
  as GAANDHAARAM in descriptions.
~Gaandhaaram 

  The third of the 7 notes.  It can take three positions - SUDDHA 
  GAANDHAARAM (E flat),  SAADHARANA  GAANDHAARAM (E)  
  and  ANTHARA GAANDHAARAM (E  sharp), referred to in this 
  package as ga0, ga1 and ga2 respectively.  The note Suddha 
  Gaandhaaram (ga0) is in the same position as CHATHUSRUTHI 
  RISHABHAM (ri2)  and RAAGAMs using it  are VIVAADHI 
  raagams.
~Gamakam

  Grace.  Movement between notes without break of voice.  The 
  movement may be oscillatory, a single slide or a quick transition 
  with a stress.  The use of  gamakams is a basic  feature of
  Indian Music and in Carnatic Music the use of correct gamakams is
  as important as the use of proper notes to sing a RAAGAM correctly.
  Traditionally 10 types of gamakams are supposed to be used but 
  even old texts describe more.

~Gathi   see NADAI.
~Geetham
 
  Simple songs taught as beginner's exercises.  They avoid
  SANGATHIs and use limited GAMAKAMs  (ex. Sri Gananaatha
  a geetham in Malahari and Vara Veena in Mohanam). Lakshana
  Geethams describe the raaga lakshanam or raaga grammar.
~Graha

  The starting note for a melody or RAAGAM phrase. The term is 
  not much used now. It was widely used in ancient texts to define 
  raagams along with NYAASA, AMSA etc.
~Jaaru

  A GAMAKAM in which there is a slide from one note to another. 
  Etra Jaaru means upwards slide and Erakku Jaaru downward 
  slide. The symbols ' / ' and ' \ ' are sometimes used in notation
  to indicate Etra Jaaru and Erakku Jaaru
~Jaathi

  Used in the context of rhythm (THAALAM) refers to the number of 
  AKSHARAMs in the LAGHU (ex.)  KHANDA Jaathi THRIPUTA  
  thaalam has  5 aksharams in the laghu.  The jaathi does not  
  affect the number of aksharamsof  DHRUTHAM or ANUDHRU-
  THAM. The Jaathis and their associated numbers  are:

             THISRA              3
             CHATHUSRA      4
             KHANDA            5
             MISRA               7
             SANKEERNA     9
~Jaavali

  Composition in lighter or romantic vein generally set to  RAKTHI 
  RAAGAMS and sung towards the end of the concert.
~Jampa Thaalam

  One of the 35 THAALAMs.   Consists of one  LAGHU,  one
  ANUDHRUTHAM and one DHRUTHAM. The common Jampa   
  thaalam is of the MISRA JAATHI i.e. Laghu with 7 AKSHARAMs 
  and a total of 10 aksharams (7+1+2).  Only thaalam in the seven 
  basic thaalams having Anudhrutham as an ANGAM.  Often krithis
  composed in Jampa thaalam are sung in KHANDA CHAAPU 
  thaalam consisting of 2 and half beats and the term Jampai used
  to refer to Khanda Chaapu also.
~Janaka

  (Lit. giving birth to).  Refers to the parent scale or MELAM from 
  which the JANYA raagam is "born".  Sometimes the principal
  RAAGAM of the parent scale is called janaka raagam.
~Janta

  A form of GAMAKAM where the same note is sung twice,  the
  second with a stress by momentarily touching a lower note (or
  the higher note) before the second note is sung. (lit.) Pair (Telugu).
~Janya

  (Lit. born).  Refers to RAAGAMs other than "MELAKARTHA" or full 
  scale raagams.  They may omit some notes of the parent or 
  JANAKA scale, or have devious or VAKRA ascent or descent, or 
  have a note not occurring  in the parent scale.  Some  janya 
  raagams are more popular than the janaka raagams (Naata
  from Chalanaata and  Poorvikalyaani from Gamanasrama) as
  apparently they existed before the 72  Melakartha system.
~Kaakali Nishaadham

  The 12th or the last  note in the 12 notes system  (ni2 in this
  package).  The (seventh) white note B.  It is just below the sa of
  the next octave and is often a leading note and is sung close to
  sa.   (Kaakali - lit. sweet and low.)
~Kaal

  One fourth (Tamil). The term "kaal idam" is used to refer  to 
  compositions which start one fourth AKSHARAM after the start 
  of the THAALAM cycle.
~Kaalam

  (Lit. time).  In rhythm it refers to the tempo.  For lessons up to
  Geethams, the first kaalam uses one note per  AKSHARAM, the
  second  kaalam  2 notes per aksharam, the third kaalam 4 notes
  per aksharam and so on doubling the number of notes. For 
  Varnams which are often sung in 2 or 3 kaalams, the first kaalam
  has 4 notes the second 8 notes and the third 16 notes per 
  aksharam. In krithis there is no uniformity in writing the number
  of notes per aksharam in the notation. 
  
  When  NADAIs other than chathusra nadai are used, the first
  kaalam may have as many notes as the gathi indicates i.e. 3  
  for THISRA nadai, 5 for KHANDA nadai,  doubling for higher 
  kaalams.
~Kaarvai

   Prolonging a note without break, generally without GAMAKAM.
  
~Kaisiki Nishaadham

  The eleventh note in the 12 notes system (ni1 in this package). 
  The black note B flat. In Carnatic Music it is often held with 
  GAMAKAM from da2.
~Kalai

  (The 'lai' is pronounced with a folded tongue)  When the tempo is 
  very slow,  the beats,  counts and waves of the thaalam are 
  repeated once more.  Such a krithi is said to be in  2 kalai   
  chowkam.  Some very slow pallavis are in 4 kalai chowkam.
~Kalpana Swaram

  Extempore  singing of   sa ri ga ma (solfa)  at the end or middle of 
  a song, set to rhythmic patterns and each group terminated  by the 
  PALLAVI or other suitable line of the  song.  The development of  
  complex rhythmic patterns while singing kalpana swaram has 
  become a test of mastery of the THAALAM.  Singing kalpana  
  swaram is always resorted to in RAAGAM, THAANAM, PALLAVI  
  and often the swarams may be in  RAAGAMAALIKA. (Kalpana - 
  one's own creation - Imagination) 
~Kampitham

  A form of GAMAKAM,  the voice  moving slowly between two notes 
  up and down once, twice or even more. The movement can also 
  start or reach positions slightly above or below a note with micro 
  tones.
~Kattai
  The system used in Carnatic Music for referring to the position
  of the tonic (sa) in the Harmonium keyboard (lit. wood - here
  key). When a musician sings with the first white note on the key-
  board as his 'sa' he sings in 1 kattai. The 2nd white note is 2
  kattai and so on.  The black notes get half number added to the
  previous white note. (So there is no 3 and half and 7 and half
  kattais as there are no black notes between the 3rd and 4th,
  7th and 8th).  Often the position is approximate and the musician
  can chose sa in between 2 key positons. Fixing the kattai helps
  the accompaniments to use instruments (like Mridhangam) suitable
  for the aadhaara sruthi chosen.  In modern keyboards 1 kattai
  corresponds to a frequency of 261.6 and 6 kattai to 440 but a male
  voice singing 1 kattai actually has half the frequency (about 131)
  but higher harmonics of 262, 393 etc. would be present.
~Keerthanai

  Originally used to  describe devotional compositions, with stress 
  on the meaning of the composition, with a number of lines having 
  same tune and avoiding "SANGATHIs" or variations. They may 
  not have ANUPALLAVI, CHARANAM structure as in KRITHIs. 
  Now  however,  the words  keerthanai and  krithi are often used 
  interchangeably.
~Khanda

  5 units, (Lit. 'broken').  Used when qualifying the JAATHI or GATHI 
  (NADAI).   Khanda  jaathi  implies a LAGHU with 5 AKSHARAMs 
  and khanda nadai, 5 notes per aksharam.
~Khandippu

  A form of GAMAKAM, involving momentary touch of intermediate   
  note after a minute gap before descending to the next note (ex.)Sa-
  (da)-pa in Sankaraabharanam where there is a break after Sa and
  pa descends from da.
~Krithi

  The matured form of composition in which great stress is given to 
  the melody and rhythm.  The melody is embellished by repetition 
  of lines with variations (SANGATHIs).  Krithi generally has   
  PALLAVI, ANUPALLAVI,  CHARANAM structure but some krithis 
  may omit anupallavi and have a  "Samashti Charanam" (or 
  composite Charanam).
~Laghu

  The angam or part of the  THAALAM consisting of a beat or clap 
  followed by counting.  The total number of AKSHARAMs in a 
  Laghu is given by the JAATHI of the thaalam.
~Laya(m)

 Rhythmic aspect of music.
~Ma

  The fourth note in the 7 notes. The letter Ma is used both in notation 
  and in solfa singing.  The note is referred to as MADHYAMAM in 
  descriptions.
~Maathra(i)

  A sub-division of the aksharam.  In CHATHUSRA nadai one 
  maathrai will be one fourth of the aksharam in the 3rd kaalam.
~Madhya

  (Lit. Middle).  Used with "STHAAYI" refers to the middle octave.  
  The term "Madhyama Kaalam" is used to refer to the medium 
  tempo.

~Madhyama Sruthi

  For raagams which are generally sung below upper Sa (such
  as Kuranji, Naadhanaamakriya etc.), the usual practice is to 
  temporarily treat the ma1 of the basic sruthi as the tonic or as 
  the new sa. In the sruthi box instead of sa, pa, Sa the notes 
  sa, ma1 and Sa are used. Thus all the notes get transposed. 
  For instance the pa of the previous sruthi now becomes ri2, the 
  Sa becomes pa and Ma1 becomes Sa, thus reaching the Ma1 
  of the original sruthi though the raagam itself moves below Sa.
  The artiste is then said to sing in Madhyama Sruthi.

~Madhyamam

  The fifth or middle note in the 7 notes. Takes two variations.    
  SUDDHA MADHYAMAM (F)  and PRATHI MADHYAMAM (F#),
  referred to in this package as ma1 and ma2.  The 72 MELAMs are
  broadly divided into 2 groups of  36 melams based on the use of
  ma1 or ma2.  The two notes cannot occur together in the 72 
  melam scheme.
~Mandhra

  Used with STHAAYI.  Mandhra STHAAYI refers to the lower octave.
~Matya thaalam

  One of the 35 THAALAMs.    Consists of one  LAGHU,  one
  DHRUTHAM  and one LAGHU. The common Matya thaalam is
  of the CHATHUSRA  Jaathi consisting of  10 AKSHARAMs
  (4+2+4).
~Melakartha

  The  principal RAAGAM of the scale in the 72 mela scheme,  using 
  all the  7 notes and without VAKRA descent or ascent and without 
  any ANYA  SWARAM.  Such raagams are also referred to as 
  Raagaanga raagams.
~Melam

  A 'scale' consisting of 7 notes selected out of the possible 72 
  combinations. Also refers to fixing frets on the VEENA.
~Misra

  7 units (Lit. `mixed'). Used when qualifying the JAATHI or NADAI 
  (gathi) of a THAALAM.  Misra Jaathi implies a LAGHU of 7 
  AKSHARAMs and misra nadai, 7 notes per aksharam.
~Mukkaal

  Three fourths (Tamil). Used to indicate starting point of composi-
  tions  which start after 3/4 unit of time - Mukkaal Idam (Idam - Place).
  More common in  compositions in two kalai chowkam.
~Naadham

  Musical Sound. Timbre.
~Nadai or Gathi

  The nadai with KAALAM decides the number of swarams per
  AKSHARAM. The nadai decides the basic units i.e. 3,4,5,7 or 9 
  and kaalam decides the multiple of these units. The most common 
  nadai is CHATHUSRA with 4 or multiples of 4 notes (as also 2
  notes) per aksharam. THISRA nadai employs 3 notes or multiples 
  of 3 (6,12 etc.) notes per aksharam.  KHANDA, MISRA and 
  SANKEERNA nadais use  5,7 and 9 notes per aksharam respec-   
  tively but are not common. The term 'Gathi' is identical with nadai.
~Ni

  The seventh of the 7 notes. The letter Ni is used both for notation 
  and for solfa singing. The note is also referred to as NISHAADHAM.
~Niraval

  Elaboration of a particular line of the KRITHI with extempore   
  melody and producing rhythmic patterns.   Generally KALPANAA 
  SWARAM singing follows Niraval.
~Nishaadham

  The note Ni.   It can take 3 positions  -  SUDDHA NISHAADHAM
  (A),  KAISIKI NISHAADHAM (B flat), KAAKALI NISHAADHAM
  (B) ,referred to as  ni0,ni1 and  ni2 in this package.   Suddha Nisha-
  dham is in the  position of  CHATHUSRUTHI  DHAIVATHAM   
  (da2) and raagams using it are VIVAADHI.
~Nokku or Thirupam

  A type of GAMAKAM in which a note higher than the note to
  be sung is touched first and then the required note is reached. 
  Examples are ga2 and ni2 of Maayamaalavagowla in ascent,
  ri2 of Sankaraabharanam in ascent.  Also applied for the 
  starting note in many cases like ri2 of Sankaraabharanam,
  ni in the phrase 'ni sa Ree' (Bhairavi) ma in 'pa ma pa'
  (Madhyamavathi) etc. Ni2 and ma2 are mostly held with this
  gamakam in the ascent.

~Names of notes-in ascending order of pitch     Symbols
                                            used in Rasika

 C  Shadjam  ...     ...    ...    ...            sa
 Db Suddha Rishabham ...    ...    ...            ri1
 D  Chathusruthi Rishabham/Suddha Gaandhaaram     ri2/ga0
 Eb Saadhaarana Gaandhaaram/Shadsruthi Rishabham  ga1/ri3
 E  Anthara Gaandhaaram     ...    ...            ga2
 F  Suddha Madhyamam ...    ...    ...            ma1
 F# Prathi Madhyamam ...    ...    ...            ma2
 G  Panchamam        ...    ...    ...            pa
 Ab Suddha Dhaivatham       ...    ...            da1
 A  Chathusruthi Dhaivatham/Suddha Nishaadham     da2/ni0
 Bb Kaisiki Nishaadham/Shadsruthi Dhaivatham      ni1/da3
 B  Kaakali Nishaadham      ...    ...            ni
 C  Thaara Shadjam    ...   ...    ...   ...      Sa

 Middle octave notes are shown with all letters in lower
 case, upper octave notes with first letter in upper
 case and lower octave notes with second letter in upper
 case.
~Nyaasa

  Ending note, especially when the ending implies a strong
  establishment on the note. (Lit. deposit, lie down).
~Ouduva  (or Oudava)

  Using 5 notes only.  An Ouduva RAAGAM uses only five notes  
  (ex.) Mohanam uses sa ri ga pa da.
~Pa

  The fifth of the 7 notes.  The  letter  Pa is used both for notation and 
  for solfa singing.   The note is also referred to as PANCHAMAM 
  (Lit. fifth). It has no variations.
~Padham

  A type of composition where the lyric is erotic in content and  
  mainly used for dance.   Usually sung near the end of a concert.
~Pallavi

  1.  The first movement of the  song and used as refrain. The 
  Pallavi is repeated after ANUPALLAVI and the CHARANAM
  (after each  charanam  if  there are more than one).  The Pallavi 
  often has many variations (SANGATHIs).
 
  2. A small piece of composition usually covering a single 
  aavartham and sung with elaborate melodic and rhythmic imp-
  rovisation usually after singing RAAGAM and THAANAM. Often
  lines from larger compositions are chosen for pallavi. The pallavi 
  is often set to less common thaalams and stresses rhythm 
  (equivalent of Khyal of Hindusthani Music).
~Panchamam

  The note Pa. The eighth note in the 12 notes system.  It is invariant 
  and can take only one position with relative frequency 3/2. (Lit. 
  Fifth). The fifth white note G.  No GAMAKAM is associated with it.
  One of the strings of the THAMBOORA  is tuned to panchamam of
  MANDHRA STHAAYI
~Pann

  The Tamil name for raagam used in the traditional THEVAARAM 
  singing. The 'Tamil Isai Changam' has identified many of these panns 
  with the present day raagams. Some examples are  Sevvazhi -
  Yadhukulakaambodhi, Pazhampanchuram - Sankaraabharanam,
  Kausikam - Bhairavi,  Saadhaari - Panthuvaraali,  Thakkesi - 
  Kaambhodhi, Senthuruthi - Madhyamaavathi, Aandhaalikkuranji -
  Saama. 
~Poorvaanga

  The lower range (from sa to below pa) in the RAAGAM's 
  movement.
~Prathi Madhyamam
 
 The seventh note in the 12 notes system  (ma2 in this package).  
 The black note F#.   In  Carnatic Music it is rarely prolonged without 
 GAMAKAM and is sung close to pa (G).
~Prayogam

  (Lit. usage). Used when referring to usage of typical phrases and 
  special phrases. Sometimes refers to the use of special  notes
  (like  BHAASHAANGA  SWARA prayogam).
~Raagam

  (Lit. color, emotion). A musical mood generally defined in  
  Carnatic Music by the notes used, the order in which they are sung 
  in the ascent and descent and the special phrases used.  In 
  addition the GAMAKAMs used, prolonging some notes without 
  gamakam and compulsory use of gamakam on some notes 
  complete the description of a raagam.  The compositions of  well 
  known composers are often used as standards for defining a 
  raagam.  Varnams are also taken as standards for the raagams.
~Raagamalika

  A composition in which more than one raagam is used.   The
  PALLAVI, ANUPALLAVI  and  CHARANAM  (or each charanam  if
  there is more than one)  may all be in  different  RAAGAMs.
  CHITTA SWARAMS  in each raagam may follow the anupallavi
  and the charanams in the same raagam and in the end chitta
  swarams in all raagams used may be sung. Thaanam in raaga-
  maalika is often  played in the Ghana Panchaka raagams (Naata,
  Gowla, Aarabhi, Varaali, Sree) on the Veena.  
~Rakthi

  (Lit. pleasing, charming). Used to describe raagams which are 
  JANYAMs and  involve fine  GAMAKAMs  leading to charm (like 
  Sahaana, Hindholam).
~Ri

  The second of the 7 notes.  The letter Ri is used both for notation 
  and for solfa singing.  The note is also referred to as RISHABHAM.
~Rishabham

  The note Ri. It can take 3 positions-SUDDHA RISHABHAM (D flat), 
  CHATHUSRUTHI   RISHABHAM (D) and   SHADSRUTHI 
  RISHABHAM (D sharp), referred to as ri1, ri2 and ri3 in this package.
  Shadsruthi Rishabham is in the same positions as SAADHAA-
  RANA GAANDHAARAM (ga1) and RAAGAMs using it are  
  VIVAADHI.
~Roopaka Thaalam

  A  THAALAM consisting of one  DHRUTHAM (2 aksharams) and 
  one LAGHU  (whose AKSHARAMs depend on the JAATHI).  The 
  common Roopaka thaalam is  CHATHUSRA Roopakam with 4 
  aksharams for the Laghu and a total of  6 aksharams.  Often 
  compositions in Chathusra jaathi Roopaka thaalam are sung in such 
  a tempo that the aksharams are too short and the thaalam is kept 
  by two beats followed by one wave, as if it has 3 aksharams.
~Sa

  The tonic. The letter Sa is used both for notation and for solfa 
  singing.  The note is also referred to as SHADJAM.  It has to be 
  present in all RAAGAMs though phrases omitting Sa may be used.
  It has to be sung without any GAMAKAM.  It is also called the 
  Aadhaara Shadjam as all other notes are based on its pitch.
~Saadhaarana Gaandhaaram

  The fourth note in the 12 notes system (ga1 in this package). The 
  black note E flat.  In Carnatic Music it is often held with GAMAKAM 
  from ri2.
~Samam

  (Lit. equal).  Used to refer to  compositions which start at the same 
  position as the beginning of the AAVARTHAM or rhythmic cycle 
  (Sama eduppu).
~Sampoorna

  Complete. A sampoorna RAAGAM uses all the seven notes. All 
  MELAKARTHA raagams are sampoorna  raagams in the present 
  system.  
~Samvaadhi

  A note  which  bears the harmonic relationship of  sa-pa (relative 
  frequency of  3/2) or  sa-ma  (relative  frequency 4/3) to the 
  VAADHI(dominant). The concept of VAADHI-samvaadhi is more
  explicitly used in North Indian Classical music.  It is only implicit in 
  Carnatic Music and  RAAGAMs are not defined by vaadhi and 
  samvaadhi.   However, notes with  sa-ma and  sa-pa  relationship
  are sung with similar gamakams and pairs of  phrases in the same  
  raagam often have similar relationship.
~Sanchaaram

  Dwelling on the different notes or areas of a RAAGAM and singing 
  around such notes or in such areas.  Also refers to characteristic 
  phrases of the Raagam.
~Sangathi

  In Carnatic Music it means the singing of the same line of the  
  composition with variations.   Each sangathi is  usually sung twice. 
  The variations are gradual, altering the melody of only part of the 
  line in  each sangathi and building up a fine structure.
~Sankeerna

  9 units. (Lit. mixed). Used when qualifying the JAATHI or NADAI 
  (Gathi).  Sankeerna  jaathi implies a LAGHU  with 9 AKSHARAMs 
  and Sankeerna nadai, 9 notes per aksharam.
~Sarali Varisai

  Beginner's exercises in solfa singing. Usually in the Maayaa-  
  maalavagowla scale.
~Shaadava

  Using six notes - A Shaadava raagam uses only 6 notes. (ex.) 
  Sriranjani uses sa ri ga ma da ni.
~Shadjam

  The note Sa.  (Lit. the one that gives birth to six).  The tonic note
  to which the pitches of other notes are related.  It has no variations
  and has to be used in every RAAGAM.  No absolute frequency is 
  fixed for sa and the  musician is free to chose his own.  It is also
  the note on which the ALAAPANA or a composition often ends. 
  Two strings of the THAMBOORA  are tuned to the basic sa and one 
  string  to the sa of the lower octave.
~Shadsruthi Dhaivatham

  The eleventh note in the 12 notes system  (da3 in this package)  
  and sung in the position of ni1.The black note B flat. In RAAGAMs 
  using this note, ni2 (KAAKALI NISHAADHAM) will also be used 
  and  such  raagams are VIVAADHI raagams 
~Shadsruthi Rishabham

  The  fourth note in the  12 notes system  (ri3 in this package) and 
  sung  in the  position of ga1.  The black note E flat.  In RAAGAMs 
  using this note, ga2 (ANTHARA GAANDHAARAM) will also be  
  used and raagams using this note are VIVAADHI raagams 
~Sphuritham

  A type of GAMAKAM involving stress.  JANTA swarams used in 
  ascent. Some times refers to touching the lower note momentarily 
  and then touching the higher note  with one strumming of the string 
  on the VEENA. 
~Sruthi

  Aadhaara Sruthi is the tonic. Also used to refer to the drone of the 
  Thamboora or the Sruthi box which continuously play  sa, pA and sA
  or sa,pa and Sa.   Usually the  musician chooses his sa to coincide
  with one of the keys of the harmonium.  If he chooses 2nd white
  key(D) he is said to sing in the  "2 kattai" sruthi.  If he chooses the 
  next black key then he sings in "2 and half kattai" sruthi. 

   Historically the term "sruthi"  has also been used to denote  
   intervals between notes and the octave was divided into 22
   "sruthis" and in the SUDDHA Scale  the intervals from sa were 
   3,2,4,4,3,2,4 sruthis to the next  note.
~Sthaayi

  Octave - MADHYA Sthaayi is the middle octave. MANDHRA
  sthaayi is the lower octave and THAARA sthaayi is the higher
  octave.
~Suddha

  (lit.)Pure - originally  applied to  the "Saama Gaana" notes with 
  intervals of 3,2,4,4,3,2,4 sruthis. Now in Carnatic Music it is applied 
  to  Ri,Ga, Ma, Da and Ni to refer to the lowest of the possible  
  variations of these notes in the 72  Melakartha scheme.  In North
  Indian Classical  Music the Suddha notes are the white notes of the 
  keyboard.
~Suddha Dhaivatham

 The  ninth note in the  12 notes  system  (da1 in this package).   The 
  black note A flat (next to the Fifth). In Carnatic Music it is often sung 
  with a gamakam from pa.
~Suddha Gaandhaaram

  The third  note in the 12 notes system (ga0 in this package) and 
  sung in the  position of  CHATHUSRUTHI RISHABHAM (D).  If this 
  note is used Suddha Rishabham will also be used and such 
  RAAGAMs are VIVAADHI raagams.
~Suddha Madhyamam

  The sixth note in the 12 notes system (ma1 in this package). The 
  "fourth" or the fourth white note (F) in 7 notes system . Its third 
  harmonic (4/3 X 3) and the fourth harmonic of the tonic  (1 X 4) 
  coincide.   In Carnatic music in raagams using  ga2 it is often held
  with a GAMAKAM. (Madhyamam  - central. The central note in  7 
  note system  -  also found at the point midway between sa and Sa
  of the upper octave on stringed instruments.)
~Suddha Nishaadham

  The  tenth note in the  12 notes system (ni0 in this package)  and 
  sung in the  position of  CHATHUSRUTHI  DHAIVATHAM (A). If this 
  note is used Suddha Dhaivatham will also be used and such 
  RAAGAMs are VIVAADHI raagams.
~Suddha Rishabham

  The second note in the 12 notes system (ri1 in this package). The 
  black note D flat (next to the tonic sa).  In Carnatic Music it is often 
  sung with a GAMAKAM from sa.
~Swaram

  A musical note. (Lit.) pleasant by itself.
~Swaraaksharam

  Where the letters of the  lyric coincide with the swara names:(ex.) 
  the words "Sadhaa paalaya" of the KRITHI in the RAAGAM  
  Mohanam by  G.N.Balasubramaniam are sung to the notes  Sa   
  daa  pa ga ri ga. The portion "Sadhaa paa" is in swaraaksharam.
~Thaalam

  The rhythmic frame work of Carnatic Music.   Each thaalam  is 
  defined by its parts or ANGAMs (presently used angams are 
  LAGHU, DHRUTHAM and ANUDHRUTHAM) i.e. the number and
  order in which the angams are arranged.  The JAATHI of the 
  thaalam defines the number of AKSHARAMs in the Laghu.
~Thaanam

  A special form of  improvisation of  the RAAGAM using the 
  syllables "a", "nam", "ta". Though not set to any thaalam the 
  thaanam has inherent rhythm and is supposed to stress the 
  "ghana" or heavy aspect of the raagam. In vocal music thaanam
  is sung only as part of "Raagam, Thaanam, Pallavi",  On the 
  VEENA thaanam is often played after the  ALAAPANA, before the 
  KRITHI.   RAAGAMAALIKA Thaanam is also common on Veena,  
  often using the "Ghana Panchaka"  raagams  Naata, Gowla,
  Aarabhi, Varaali and Sree.
~Thaara

  Used to refer  to notes of the  higher octave  (Thaara RISHABHAM 
  the Ri of the higher octave). Thaara STHAAYI means the octave 
  above the middle octave.
~Thamboora

  The instrument used to provide drone.   Its 4 strings are tuned  
  to  pA(lower octave) , sa, sa  and sA (lower octave)  and  these 
  are gently plucked to provide the sonorous  constant background 
  for both vocal  and instrumental music.  The instrument has a 
  curved bridge and silk strings called 'Jeeva' are placed between 
  the string and the bridge at the point of contact leading to the 
  production of  rich  harmonics in which  Anthara Gaandhaaram
 (ga2) can be heard.
~Thani Aavarthanam

  Solo playing of the percussion instrument(s) in the middle of a 
  concert usually after major composition or singing of  "Raagam, 
  Thaanam, Pallavi".
 ~Thevaaram

  Devotional hymns composed by the 'Naayanmars' Appar, Sundharar
  and Thirujnyanasambandhar which were set to music in the Chola
  period.  A system for singing these hymns in temples was also
  prescribed.  They were set in 'PANNS'  which are identifiable with
  many presently used raagams rich in gamakams like Kedhaaragowla,
  Bhairavi, Yadhukulakaambodhi, Kaambhodhi, Sankaraabharanam etc.
  The style of Thevaaram singing can be said to be strongly South
  Indian and it doubtless had great influence on the development
  of Carnatic Music style.

~Thillaana

  A type of composition using extensively the mnemonic phrases 
  of percussion instruments and dance. The PALLAVI is usually 
  entirely of such phrases (Dheem, na, thira, tha, kita, thru, thillana 
  etc.). The ANUPALLAVI  and CHARANAM may have some words
  as well as these syllables.
~Thirupam

 See NOKKU.
~Thisra (or Thrisra)
 
  3 units.  Used when qualifying the JAATHI or NADAI (Gathi). Thisra 
  jaathi implies a Laghu with 3  AKSHARAMs and Thisra nadai, 3 
  notes per aksharam.
~Thriputa Thaalam

  A THAALAM consisting of one LAGHU, and two DHRUTHAMs.  
  The number of aksharams of the Laghu depend upon the JAATHI 
  and the 2 dhruthams together have 4 aksharams.   When unquali-
  fied, Thriputa  thaalam refers to  THISRA  Jaathi Thriputa thaalam 
  with 7 aksharams (3+2+2). The most popular thaalam, AADHI 
  THAALAM is really Chathusra Jaathi Thriputa  thaalam with 8 
  aksharams (4+2+2).
~Thrisra (or Thisra)
 
  3 units.  Used when qualifying the JAATHI or NADAI (Gathi). Thisra 
  jaathi implies a Laghu with 3  AKSHARAMs and Thisra nadai, 3 
  notes per aksharam.
~Upaanga 

  An  Upaanga raagam takes only all or some of the  notes of
  the parent MELAM  i.e.,  it uses only the same variety of the swaram 
  throughout.(As opposed to BHAASHAANGA raagams which use
  varieties of swarams not in parent scale in addition to the variety of 
  the parent scale.)
~Uttharaanga

  The upper range (pa and above up to Sa) in the RAAGAM's 
   movement.
~Vaadhi

  The dominant note.  The concept of vaadhi - SAMVAADHI is not
  explicit in Carnatic Music (see Samvaadhi).
~Vakra

  Devious - winding(ascent or descent). (ex.) Ascent of Aanandha-
  bhairavi sa ga ri ga ma pa da pa Sa where after ga we come down
  to ri before going up again; descent of Reethigowla  Sa ni da ma ga 
  ma pa ma ga ri sa where after reaching ga the higher notes ma and
  pa are reached again before coming down.
~Varjya

  Omission of a note.  (e.g ) Sriranjani is a Panchama Varjya raagam 
  as it omits the note Pa.  Hindholam is a  Panchama and Rishabha 
  varjya raagam as it omits Pa and Ri.
~Varnam

  A type of  composition  usually taught before teaching KRITHIS. 
  The varnam in a raagam is supposed to cover all characteristic 
  usages of the raagam. In addition the main lyric is sparse in  
  consonants giving  good training to the voice  (changing notes in 
  the same  vowel or  akaara saadhaka).  The  ANUPALLAVI and  
  CHARANAM have lyric as well as pure solfa notes, in charanam 
  in 4 to 6 groups after which the lyric of the charanam is sung again.

  Varnams are of two types. THAANA Varnam is used mostly in  
  singing and Padha varnam used both for singing and dance.  In  
  padha varnams the solfa notes have also corresponding words 
  and both are sung one after other.

  Concerts are often started with a varnam.
~Veena

  A fretted musical instrument with fixed  frets.  The instrument has  
  apparently influenced the development of many musical forms 
  (like THAANAM)  and the GAMAKAMs now in use in Carnatic 
  Music.   On the Veena change of pitch is achieved both by moving 
  to another fret or by pulling the string across the frets and 
  increasing the tension and the pitch. 
~Vikritha

  Modified - opposite of SUDDHA e.g.  Vikritha swara. The concept 
  can be properly applied if only 2 variations are allowed for  ri,ga,     
  ma,da and ni  as in  North Indian classical music  where the  white 
  notes are Suddha notes and the others Vikritha (Komal in the case 
  of ri, ga, da, ni and Theevra in the case of ma).  In Carnatic Music the
  use of Suddha Ga and Suddha Ni actually leads to VIVAADHI
  (meaning dissonant) Raagams.
~Vilamba

  Slow. "Vilamba KAALAM" means slow tempo. 
~Vivaadhi

  (Lit. dissonant). Historically used to refer to the interval of 2 sruthis 
  -between the pairs of the original Suddha Swaras Ri-Ga and Da-Ni.   
  Now in Carnatic Music the term refers to RAAGAMs which use 
  any of the following four notes:

        SHADSRUTHI RISHABHAM (ri3),
        SUDDHA GAANDHAARAM (ga0),
        SHADSRUTHI DHAIVATHAM (da3), 
        SUDDHA NISHAADHAM (ni0).
~



