~@ 1. Start Here ! $
		
 The tradational way of learning carnatic music is presented here. The lessons
 mentioned are available in the main programs Sishya which can be accessed
 clicking 'Open Sishya' menu above.

 Before starting on the lessons you have to find out your convenient 'Aadhara Sruthi'
 which is the pitch of the 'Tonic' most convenient for you so that you can sing in 2
 'Sthaayis' (octaves) easily. Don't get deterred by these terms. Here is a rule of thumb.
 Women (girls and grown ups) can start with a Sruthi of 5 'Kattai'. Young boys could
 also use the same before their voice 'breaks' . Men would generally use 1 Kattai
 The numbers 1 and 5 represent the pitch of sa, the first of the seven notes used in
 Carnatic Music - sa, ri, ga, ma, pa, da & ni.  1 kattai implies that the sa is at the same
 pitch as the 1st white key (or 8th, 15th.. etc. white keys) on the Keyboard and 5 kattai
 is the 5th white key (or 12th, 19th.. etc white keys). Carnatic music is always played or
 sung with a Sruthi instrument - Thamboora or Sruthi Box in the background which
 generates the tones of sa, pa (the fifth note) and upper Sa, in the pitches of the selected
 sruthi. 'Swaram' is the Carnatic name for a note.

 In Sishya the Sruthi can be changed (up or down) to suit your voice since you practice
 with Veena/Flute tones which are synthetic and the pitch can be easily changed
 .(Next - Check your voice)          
~@ 2. Check your voice with the default Sruthis$

 To see whether you are comfortable with the default Aadhara Sruthis click below
 (either 5 kattai - boys, girls and ladies or 1 kattai - men). You can click sa - pa - Sa 
 separately and try to sing at the same pitch. Try to hold the note with your voice
 and merge it  with the recorded voice. If you are not sure ask someone to help you
 to see whether you are able to merge your voice with the recorded sound. You can 
 also try with the instruments (which some persons find it easier to merge with).
 Click 'Stop' button to stop the sound.

 Once you are able to merge your voice reasonably well with the recordings, you
 can click on the 'sa pa Sa' button and sing the notes  'sa pa Sa pa sa' with the
 recorded voice. Try to hold the note as long as in the  recording. Don't bother if 
 your voice wavers a bit; it will improve as you get along.

 If you find that the default 1 or 5 kattai does not suit you, open Sishya (in the menu
 above click 'Open Sishya' and click 'Instrumental' or If you are already in Sishya then
 click the menu  'Lessons' and click on "Sruthi Test" (in the lessons window click on
 'Click for Sruthi Testing'). This loads a small file with saa-paa-Saa-paa-saa and the
 notes ranging from pAA of lower octave to Paa of upper octave. Play this with 1 kattai
 or 5 kattai and try to align your voice with the notes. If you find you have to strain
 for touching the upper notes then reduce the Sruthi. If you find you cannot reach the
 lower notes increase the Sruthi. (Next - The lessons)
~@3. The lessons $

 Traditionally Carnatic Music the lessons start with 'Sarali Varisai' (singing simple
 combination of notes within the 'Madhya Sthaayi' or middle octave in different
 tempos) and goes on to 'Hechu Sthaayi Varisai' (notes touching the higher octave),
 'Janta varisai' (doubling of notes with stress), 'Dhaattu Varisai' (jumping around among
 notes) and 'Alankaaram' - singing notes in different 'Thaalams' (rhythmic cycles).
 Together these are called 'Swaraavali'. All the lessons involve singing only the notes
 sa, ri, ga, ma, pa, da, ni and the higher octave Sa.  In the case of Hechusthaayi varisai
 notes Ri, Ga, and Ma of the higher octave are also used. As you progress you will
 understand how the same name is used for the notes at a higher pitch.  There are no
 lyrics for these lessons. These are to be practiced in 3 tempos, the basic (1st Kaalam),
 double (2nd Kaalam) and quadruple (3rd Kaalam). The lessons are in all the 3 kaalams.

 The next page explains the hand gestures for keeping thaalam. Note that irrespective
 of the kaalam the hand gestures will go at the same speed and in the same cyclic
 fashion.

 There is no absolute tempo standard in carnatic music. In Sishya Sarali varisais are
 given in very slow speed so that you can sing all the Kaalams easily. Other lessons
 are in different higher speeds. If you find that the tempo in the lessons is too fast,
 you can make them slower by changing the number in the 'Tempo' box and viceversa.
 Always choose a number divisible by 8 or preferably by 16.  Larger number means 
 slower tempo. (Next - Rhythm or Thaalam)
~@4. Rhythm or Thaalam$

 In Carnatic music we keep rhythm by hand gestures called 'Kriya'.
 The three basic gestures are  (See the pictures below):

 1.Beating the palm downwards on your thigh (possible only if you are sitting!) or on
      the other palm (a clap)
 2.Counting with fingers 
 3.Turning the palm up (wave).           
 The order and number of times these kriyas are performed in a cycle defines the
 Thaalam. In the lessons window of Sishya the hand gestures are shown on top right
 corner at each point of the music (along with a bell like sound).  All the lessons 
 (except Alankaarams and the Bhairavi Varnam) are in a simple 8 unit Rhythm
 cycle called 'Aadhi Thaalam'  which goes like this:

 {1.clap,  2.count(little finger),  3.count(ring finger),  4.count(middle finger)
 5.clap,  6.turn palm up,  7.clap,  8.turn palm up}

 This one cycle is called an Aavartham and is repeated till the song ends.  

 The time taken for each kriya (Clap or Count or Wave) is same and is referred to as
 one Aksharam or one Akshara Kaalam.

 See later regarding the different Rhythm Cycles of Alankaarams (Next First Lesson)
 ~@5. First Lesson$

 You can open Sishya by clicking 'Lessons (Veen/Flute Audio)..' in the opening
 screen of Gaayaka-Sishya without closing this window. Or you can click the 'Open
 Sishya' menu above to open Sishya. You get a window showing the lessons available.
 The Swaraavali list is seen first. To get lists of other lessons click the appropriate 
 category at the bottom. To start with click 'Sarali Varisai (1 to 7)' Take some time 
 to study the screen.  In the beginning you can start playing without changing any 
 values except Sruthi. Click Sruthi Menu and Choose your Sruthi 5 kattai or 1 kattai
 or other suitable sruthi for your voice. The screen is divided into rows and cells
 showing the note names and the Kaalam number when tempo changes.

 (You can also open 'Sishyas.hlp' which explains the screens with pictures)

 The first line reads "Sruthi" followed by 'saa paa Saa paa saa' and the next line
 reads 'Join'. The first cell gives the aadhara sruthi sound (Thamboora) Then the
 notes 'saa paa Saa paa saa' are heard (meant just to listen). This is repeated in
 the next line - meant for the student to join.

 Click 'Play'. The cell being played changes to pink color. Thamboora sound is heard
 in the 1st cell and the subsequent cells play 'saa paa Saa paa saa'. Just listen. Join
 with the music in the second line and sing 'saa paa Saa paa saa' with the music. The
 third line - Thaalam has the background Thamboora and thaalam sound. The hand
 gestures picture also appears. Just watch and try to follow the gestures. The actual
 lesson starts in the fourth line, simple 'sa ri ga ma pa da ni Sa' and 'Sa ni da pa ma
 ga ri sa'  (the first sarali varisai)  played in slow tempo (Kaalam 1). Just listen. 
 The line will be repeated for you to join. Listen to the next line also and then you
 can click 'Stop'. Go to the next page in this window for explanation of various 
 controls on the screen.

~@6. First Lesson - continued$

 Now {left click} on the first cell of the 4th line (sa Kaalam 1) and {right click} on the
 last cell of the 7th line. You find that 4 rows are in blue and rest in white. Now only
 the blue cells will be played.

 Click 'Play Mode' menu and choose 'Aavartham Repeat'.  Now click 'Play'. The music
 in the tone of Flute will start. Each line will be repeated once. Listen on the first pass
 and join on the next pass. The first 2 lines are in Kaalam 1, the next in Kaalam 2 
 (double tempo) and 4th line is double as fast as the 3rd line.

 If you find it difficult to merge with Flute tone, click the 'Instrument' menu and choose
 Veena.  

 Once you are able to adjust your voice to the recorded tones, click the 'Play mode'
 menu and choose 'Normal (Continuous Play)'. The selction or entire file plays 
 continuously once. You can get the selected part or the whole file to play repeatedly 
 by clicking the check box 'Loop (Repeat)'. This is the best way to learn any difficult
 part of a lesson. Select a part, select 'Normal' mode, click the 'Loop' check box and
 play. When in 'Loop' you have to click 'Stop' to stop the music. 

 In the slowest tempo, if you find that one Aavartham is too much to remember, select 
 'Half Aavartham Repeat followed by Full Aavartham' in the 'Play mode' menu and
 try whether it suits you better in the beginning. (Next  The Sishya Screen)
~@7. The Sishya Screen$

 (Sishyas.hlp explains the screen with pictures - open Sishya and press F1)

 Most of the controls on the Sishya screen are self explanatory. 'File' is for opening  
 a file. You rarely have to use this since you can access the lessons from the lessons  
 window which automatically opens when you start the program. You can also get the
 lessons window by clicking ont he 'Lessons' menu. 'Select All' is for selecting the
 entire file for playing (which is the default when you open a file). Selected cells are
 in pale blue color and the rest are with white background. In the previous page you have
 seen how to select a group of cells, by left-clicking on the starting cell and right-
 clicking on the ending cell. The starting cell should always be the start of an aavartham
 - in the case of Swaraavalis the first cell of any row. If you left click on a cell in the
 middle you will get a warning. You can still play from there but the hand gestures will
 start from that point and can confuse you.

 'Play Mode' enables you to select 5 possible ways of playing the lessons
 (1) Normal Continuous Play of selected part, (2) Aavartham repeat - each aavartham
 is repeated once (3) Half Aavartham repeat - each half avartham is repeated for the
 student to join and then entire avartham is repeated  Two additional modes for (2) and
 (3) are avialable in which the repeated audio is in low volume. The half-avartham mode  
 is useful for beginners but the thaalam gestures may be a bit confusing since when  
 half aavartham is repeated the gestures will be for the second half of the aavartham,
 but it will be all right when full aavartham is repeated. In any mode if 'Loop' is checked
 the music will be repeated after the selected part is played. 

 The last 2 additional modes in which the volume of repeated audio is low, can be used 
 after the lesson has been properly learnt and enable you to compare your intonation
 with the lesson.  However, in this mode you cannot use 'Loop'. If you try Loop you will
 find that the entire selection is played in low volume when it loops. (continued next page)
~@8. The Sishya Screen (continued)$

 'Instrument' - for selection of Veena or Flute, 'Sruthi' - for selection of Aadhara Sruthi. 
 'SruthiVolume' - for adjusting background Thamboora volume - 0 will cut it out and 9 is
 the maximum. 'Melam Change' - for practicing scales other than Maayamalavagowla. 
 This will be blanked out in lessons with gamakam and in Geethams and Varnams.

 The 3 buttons 'Play', 'Pause' and 'Stop' are self explanatory. You click 'Pause' 
 instead of Stop when you want to comtinue from that point. The word on the 'Pause'
 button changes to  'Resume' and clicking again resumes the music. The 'Loop'
 Check Box , if checked repeatedly plays the selected cells. This is in addition to the
 built in loops in modes 2 and 3. When you load a lesson the 'Tempo' box and the
 'Base Tempo' boxes show the same values. The number represents the duration of
 a single note in seconds, multiplied by 100. The Tempo can be increased or reduced.
 {Larger number means slower music}. In lessons with Gamakam too much of change
 of the tempo from the base tempo will distort the music. Always use a number divisible
 by 8 or better by 16.

 Move the cursor over the 'Status' label and you get a small pop up window showing
 the Instrument selected, the Sruthi Selected, Sruthi Volume, whether Melam change is 
 possible for the chosen lesson and the current mode of play.

 Thaalam Sound Check Box if unchecked will stop the thaalam (bell like) sound. 
 Similarly the 'Hide Thaalam picture' check box if checked will hide the picture.  
 The 2 scroll bars on top right enable you to adjust the volumes of the thaalam
 sounds  The longish window above the cells shows information about the lesson.
 (Next - The Scales for Swaraavali, Gamakam)
~@9. The Scales for Swaraavali.  Gamakam.$

 All the Swaraavali exercises are usually taught in the scale Maayamalavagowla
 which uses 5 white notes and 2 black notes of a keyboard. (see picture below).
 But actually you can get many different combinations of 7 notes from the 12
 notes giving different melams (See Rasika - Melam module for more information).

 Gamakam is an essential part of Carnatic Music. Gamakams are oscillations and
 unbroken movements between and around notes. The Swaraavali's are however
 taught without Gamakam or with minimum Gamakam.  But Sishya includes some
 Swaraavali's with Gamakam which you can practice at a later stage.

 Students of instrumental music are often asked to practice some of the Swaraavalis
 in different 'scales' other than Maayamalavagowla. Lessons without Gamakam in
 Sishya can be easily changed to 4 other scales by simply choosing from the 'Melam
 change' Menu. It is a good idea for the vocal student also to practice some
 Swaraavali's in other scales given in the menu especially Melam 29 (Dheera-
 Sankarabharanam) which uses all the white notes if you sing in 1 kattai.
 (Next - Conventions in notation)
~@10. Some Conventions in notation$

 In printed notation, the convention is to put a dot above the note for upper octave and
 a dot below the note for lower octave. In Sishya (and other programs of this package)
 the convention used is - all small case letters for middle octave, first letter in upper
 case for higher octave and second letter in upper case for lower octave - like this
'pA dA nI sa ri ga ma pa da ni Sa Ri Ga Ma' - to sing from pa of lower octave, through
 middle octave and then upto ma in upper octave. In Swaraavali you have upper octave
 in 'Hechu Sthaayi varisai' and in many Geethams you have lower and upper octave 
 notes.

 When a note (ex. sa) is prolonged for 2 note duration it is either  'saa or sa ,' .  The
 comma is equivalent to one unit duration. A semicolon ';' is equal to 2 note duration.
 These are also used for silences and you have to listen to the music to know what
 exactly a comma or semicolon inplies. A four note duration of a single note can be
 written as  'sa , , ,' or 'saa ;'

 In Sishya in kaalam 1 (slowest tempo) one note is shown in one cell. In kaalam 2, two
 notes are shown in a cell.  So in kaalam 1 a double note will be written as 'sa' in one
 cell (with the symbol -> to show that the note is prolonged into the next cell without
 break) and a comma in the next cell, while the same note in kaalam 2 will be 'saa' in
 one cell.  In Swaraavali and Geetham excercises kaalam 1 has one note per 'Aksharam'
 and kaalam 2 has 2 notes and kaalam 3 has 4 notes. Because of this one 'Aavartham' of
 Aadhi thaalam will have 8 notes in kaalam 1, 16 in kaalam 2 and 32 in kaalam 3. (For
 Janta varisai however, kaalam 1 implies a pair of notes per aksharam,  kaalam 2 pairs
 etc., each double note being counted as one)(Next - Alankaarams)
~@11. Alankaarams$

 The Alankaarams are swarams sung in the 7 'Soolaadhi' thaalams. You can see the
 Thaalam module of Rasika for full information on the thaalam system. Here, the
 definitions of the 7 thaalams used in Alankaarams is given.

 {1. Dhruva} - Clap (Beat) followed by 3 counts, clap and turn palm up, clap followed by
   3 counts,(again) clap followed by 3 counts - 14 aksharams in all.
 {2. Matya} - Clap followed by 3 counts,  clap and turn palm up, clap followed by 
   3 counts - 10 aksharams in all.
 {3. Roopaka} - Clap and turn palm up, clap followed by 3 counts - 6 aksharams.
 {4. Jampa } - Clap followed by 6 counts, clap, clap and turn palm up.- 10 aksharams.
 {5. Thriputa} - Clap followed by 2 counts, clap and turn palm up - 7 aksharams.
 {6. Ata} - Clap followed by 4 counts, (again) clap followed by 4 counts, clap and turn
   palm up, (again) clap and turn palm up - 14 aksharams.
 {7. Eka } - Clap followe by 3 counts - 4 aksharams

 The official name for clap (beat) followed by counts is 'Laghu', for clap and turning
 palm up is 'Dhrutham' and for only a clap is 'Anudhrutham'. Dhrutham is always 2 
 aksharams and Anudhrutham one aksharam, but the number of aksharams in Laghu 
 depends on the 'Jaathi' - 3 is 'Thisra', 4 is 'Chathusra', 5 is 'Khanda', 7 is 'Misra' 
 and 9  is 'Sankeerna'. In the above Dhruva, Matya , Roopaka and Eka are chathusra 
Jaathi  (you call it Chathusra Jaathi Dhruva thaalam etc.), Jampa is misra jaathi and 
Thriputa is thisra jaathi. Anudhrutham comes only in Jampa thaalam. (Next - Geethams)
 ~ @12. Geethams $

 After you have done the 'Swaraavali' you go to Geethams. So far you only sang the
 notes - now you have lyrics whose tune corresponds to the notes. Here you get
 your first training to adjust your pitch of the voice to a note while uttering some
 other letter (of the lyric). Geethams are simple and do not have much Gamakams
 (oscillations and movements between around notes). The Geethams are mostly
 in the 3 Thaalams  - Aadhi, Roopakam and Thriputa, though one in Eka thaalam
 has been included. To give you a good control of your voice, the Geetham lessons
 have been given both with and without Gamakam. If you have a teacher, take his
 advice about practicing Geethams with Gamakam.

 Open Sishya, click Geethams, click Sri Gananatha - usually the first Geetham taught..
 As in the case of Swaraavali, the first 2 lines let you align your voice with 'sa pa Sa'.
 Then there are 5 lines giving the Aarohanam (ascending sequence of notes) and
 Avarohanam (descending sequence) of the Raagam Malahari which is the raagam
 for this Geetham. As before you can first hear and then join. Then there is one line
 to show you the thaalam - here Roopaka thaalam which has 6 aksharams and goes
 like this:  1.Clap, 2.Turn palm up, 3 Clap, 4 Count(little finger), 5 Count(ring finger),
 6.Count(middle finger). The geetham starts after this. You find the notes on the top
 line of the cell and the corresponding letter of the lyric at the second line.
 (continued next screen)
~@13. Geethams (continued)$
 
 It is customary to sing the notes of the Geetham first and then sing the 'Saahithyam'
 (lyric). In the beginning you can go through the entire lesson singing only the notes
 (choose Aavartham Repeat mode). Once you get the notes correctly, in the same
 mode, sing the swarams in the first pass and the lyric in the second pass. Finally
 you can change the play mode to 'Normal' and sing only the lyric.

 Often a single letter of the lyric covers 2 or 3 swarams. In the beginning of the
 geetham Sri Gananatha, the syllable 'Sri' covers 2 notes ma and pa. You start
 singing 'Sri' at the pitch of ma and go up to the pitch of pa while continuing the
 vowel 'i'. In the screen a dot is put in the place for letters of the lyric, when
 the previous letter is prolonged.  In the 7th Aavartham, the letter 'Am' covers both
 'ri' and 'ma'.  However, when there is a note with double duration and a single
 letter of lyric you simply prlong the lyric letter for 2 notes ('lam' in the 5th
 line) at the same pitch.

 SriGananatha is given in 2 kaalams. Note that the hand gestures and thaalam
 proceed at the same tempo in both kaalams. To get a good control of switching
 kaalam, click 'Loop' and try to practice the last 2 Aavarthams of kaalam 1 and the
 first 2 Aavarthams of kaalam 2 in normal mode. For this choose 4 lines such that
 the kaalam changes on the third line (In the SriGananatha geetham, scroll down
 till you see '(Kal 2) Sri'  This is where kaalam 2 starts (notice that 2 notes are
 shown in one cell from here).  Select from the row ' lam . bo . dhara' (2 lines 
 above) upto 'kari vadana karuna  sagara' (4 lines in all). When the  music loops
 back you go back to kaalam 1 and when it comes to the 3rd line you  get
 kaalam 2. (next -Beyond Geethams)
~@14. Beyond Geethams$

 After the Geethams you learn Varnams in different ragams which have phrases
 typical to that ragam, have all typical gamakams and sparse in consonants so
 that you get a good practice in 'akaara saadhakam' (singing with the vowel 'Aa'
 without pronouncing a consonant). The varnams are supposed embody all the 
 typical phrases and movements of a raagam and styles of singing may vary from
 school to school.  A few varnams are included in the lessons. As the gamakams
 coming in varnams are often subtle, it is adivsable to have a teacher or a guide
 to check the student's singing.

 It is customary to sing varnams in 2 kaalams, if started sufficiently slow.  The varnams
 (except the Bhairavi varnam) are given in 2 kaalams.  Here the first kaalam has 4 notes
 per thalam aksharam and the second kaalam double that.  For Mohana varnam a
 separate lesson with thisra gathi has also been added. Try this after you progress with
 krithis.

 Krithis are compositions with lyrics and generally tunes set by the composer himself.
 Simple krithis in medium tempo are often easier to sing than varnams and often the
 teacher intersperses varnams with small krithis. Even advanced singers learn new
 varnams later. Krithis have been given as part of Gaayaka and not Sishya. The 
 Gaayaka files have the extension .gka. You can also use the Student's .wav/mp3 
 player or Student's CD player, to practice krithis available with you as .wav/mp3 
 files in your PC or in CD's. You can access these programs from the Gaayaka-Sishya
 opening menu (the last two choices).

	[End]
~
 
